---
label:
title: Foreword
subtitle:
weight: 3
type: essay
contributor:
  - id: sayre
---

Welcome to the digital present, we are glad you found us. Maybe you are a longtime supporter of San José Museum of Art. Maybe you are a scholar or student, a curious art lover, or a Ruth Asawa devotee. What is certain is that you did not stumble upon this publication, which offers unique open access to [**SJMA**](https://sjmusart.org)’s permanent collection for the first time in a bookstore or gift shop. However you discovered this catalog, we are glad you could join us.

The San José Museum of Art is a regional modern and contemporary art museum located squarely in the Capital of Silicon Valley, and the innovative ethos of this region informs who we are and whom we serve—locally and globally. The Museum’s recent strategic plan states two goals: to become a borderless museum, essential to creative life throughout the region’s diverse communities, and to re-imagine ourselves as a museum for the audience of the future. With our neighboring tech innovation partners, we are guided by the belief that creativity and access are shared values that transcend disciplines.

With these ideas in mind, and in celebration of the Museum’s 50<sup>th</sup> anniversary, ***50X50: Stories of Visionary Artists from the Collection, a Digital Publication on the 50<sup>th</sup> Anniversary of San José Museum of Art*** offers a dynamic and web-based version of a traditional permanent collection publication. Such catalogs are important because they reveal the history of a museum’s collection over time, positioning it as a legacy, a gift to the public. 50X50 spotlights the strengths of SJMA’s collection, including significant holdings of work by California artists of national and international significance; artwork in new media and emerging fields; art that thematically addresses pressing cultural, political and social issues; and work by artists who embrace new representational strategies in the Digital Age. The digital format of this publication—SJMA’s first devoted entirely to the permanent collection—brings the stories of fifty artists to life in a free, virtual format that supports the Museum’s commitment to equity and access. It also offers a rich, engaging way to share the depth and diversity of our collection, for it conveys the lives of artists, beyond the objects, through multimedia materials, photographic assets, archival ephemera, and linked citations in addition to incisive curatorial context.

“**Open scholarship**”— an emerging framework of scholarly research and publishing that encompasses open access—is another critical element of digital publishing, which creates unrestricted access to knowledge, data, and resources, and promotes the exchange of ideas. We are indebted to the generosity and vision of the Digital Publishing division at Getty Publications, in particular, Greg Albers and Kara Kirk for their invitation to execute this project with **Quire**-- a new web publishing platform that allows 50 X 50 to be optimized for discoverability, longevity, and flexibility in the output formats.

We launch this publication from prolonged and fraught physical isolation, as we shelter in place to fight the global COVID 19 pandemic. But we are not disconnected or alone. There has been no greater time to launch a digital publication – accessible to people all over the world and flexible enough to adapt to a rapidly changing artistic landscape.

**Acknowledgements**

We are very grateful to the generous donors, artists, and galleries who have gifted artwork to the Museum over the last 50 years. The Board of Trustees, currently under the leadership of Co-Presidents Cheryl Kiddoo and Tad Freese, have been stalwart champions of SJMA’s ambitious exhibitions and acquisitions, along with the Acquisitions Committee, Council of 100, Docent Council and many devoted donors. We especially acknowledge Trustee Peter Lipman and the Lipman Family Foundation, who established a dedicated endowment for acquisitions and provide visionary support for collections.

This publication is made possible in part by the Institute of Museum and Library Services (IMLS grant \#MA-10-16-0002-16).   We would like to thank our generous sponsors, the Lipman Family Foundation, and the Richard A. Karp Charitable Foundation. Additional support was provided by Cheryl and Bruce Kiddoo, Yvonne and Mike Nevens, Peggy and Yogen Dalal, Evelyn and Rick Neely, Elizabeth and Byron Ryono, Marge and Ken Nissly, Rita and Kent Norton, Elaine Cardinale, George Crow in honor of Susan Crow, Toby and Barry Fernald, Tad Freese and Brook Hartzell, the SJMA Docent Council, Elena Lebedeva and Alvin Smith, and Marsha and Jon Witkin.

I also want to thank the talented staff of the Museum, who whole-heartedly embraced this publication with unflagging passion and tremendous care and dedication. Karen Rapp, assistant director, strategic initiatives, co-authored the original proposal to the Institute of Museum and Library Services (IMLS), which provided critical initial investment, as well as funding support for staff: Laura Eliasieh, initial project research curator, and Amanda Helton, manager of digital strategy. Together with Anamarie Alongi, registrar, and Rich Karson, director of design and operations, this extraordinary team coordinated collection database upgrades, archival photography, and innumerable other tasks. Lauren Schell Dickens, senior curator, and Rory Padeken, curator, were both critical participants in the selection of photographic assets and honing narrative directions for each artist in the publication. Kathryn Wade, assistant curator, picked up the project research curator mantle, and we are grateful for her insightful writing as the principal author of the publication. Holly Shen, deputy director, joined the project in late 2018 and has provided exemplary management oversight.

Our Advisory Committee, formed in 2015&ndash;2016, made significant contributions to the success of this publication. We would like to thank Jill Sterrett, interim director of the Smart Museum of Art, University of Chicago and former SFMoMA assistant director for collections, for initial ideation on a publication that focused on the story of artists. We thank Jill and Peter Samis, San Francisco Museum of Modern Art associate curator of interpretation, for generously organizing sessions with our team on collections-focused publications. Maja Thomas led a discussion on the future of storytelling with our staff, from her perspective as chief innovation officer and a digital publishing pioneer at Hachette Livre. Discussions with collection artists, their dealers, and artist estate representatives, informed our team on the complexity of artist legacies, and we are grateful for these insightful conversations.

We asked three additional members of our SJMA community to contribute introductions to this publication, our Trustee Peter Lipman, the artist Hung Liu, and art historian Letha Chi’en. Their personal observations give voice to the disparate meanings collecting institutions represent, and how museums have changed their lives. We are grateful for their words and contributions to the San José Museum of Art.

Susan Sayre Batton

Oshman Executive Director
