---
label: Introduction
title: "Why a Permanent Collection for a 21st Century Museum of Contemporary Art"
subtitle: "A 50-Year Perspective"
short_title: A 50-Year Perspective
weight: 5
type: essay
class: page-one
contributor:
  - id: lipman
---

In an era of easy access to virtually unlimited images and background information about art, including exhibition catalogs, artist monographs, and other paper publications, along with on-line artist, gallery, and museum web pages, how does a museum and its audience benefit from retaining a permanent collection of artworks that incurs substantial costs of acquisition, conservation, and storage?

Perhaps most important, even for a multi-faceted presentation such as *50X50*, images of art are a highly incomplete substitute for direct interaction with actual objects: textural richness of oil on canvas, perspectives on sculptures from diverse angles, full range of color and light shading in photographs, unending variations generated by much new-media digital art. Additionally, attractive artworks in a permanent collection provide institutional identity and continuity for museum visitors. Visitors develop special rapport with personal favorites from works on display, delight in them during return visits, and regard such pieces as the signature of the museum. For lesser-known and emerging artists, bringing their works into a museum collection and providing audience exposure helps nurture growth and support for the art community. A broad permanent collection serves as a "library" from which the curators can discover novel interrelations between diverse works and organize creative in-house exhibitions that minimize costs. A strong collection provides resources for negotiating needed exchange loans with other institutions. The collection can also record the museum's history by acquiring outstanding pieces from exhibitions. Without bringing such works into the collection, memories of temporary shows, however appreciated, become increasingly faint with time.

For such reasons, the San Jose Museum of Art, although perhaps the youngest major art museum in a large American city, has assembled an increasingly strong and diverse collection of contemporary artworks, mainly during the past few decades. The historical growth of the collection, now more than 2,600 works, can be tracked by comparing collection artists in the *50X50* publication with those in landmark events during prior museum anniversaries. After the museum’s first 25 years (1984), only eight of these 50 artists were represented in the collection, mostly as small-scale works on paper. At the 30<sup>th</sup> anniversary of the museum in 1999, the first broad exhibition drawn from the collection, *"Into the 21<sup>st</sup> Century"*, contained works by 11 of the 50X50 artists, again largely modest works on paper (3 were oil paintings, 2 sculptures). Growth of the collection had begun to accelerate after completion of the 1990’s addition to the 19<sup>th</sup>-century post office building that is now on the National Registry of Historical Landmarks. Only five years later (2004), the 35<sup>th</sup> celebratory volume *"Selections"* featured substantive works by 27 of the *50x50* artists, along with highly regarded others not included (just among sculptors: Alexander Calder, Viola Frey, Robert Hudson, Manual Neri, Richard Shaw, Stephen de Staebler).

As summarized in 2004 by then-chief curator Susan Landauer, “The history of the collection shows a broadening scope . . . to a spectrum that includes regional, national, and international visual art of our time.” Fifteen years later, the spectrum and quality continue to increase, as exemplified by the additional artists featured in *50X50*. The collection has also become more societally and globally diverse. In addition to some archetypal donated works, recent acquisition purchases have increasingly focused on major pieces by widely esteemed living artists, including Diana Al-Hadid, Rina Banerjee, Tim Hawkinson, Jitish Kallat, Dinh Q Le, Alison Saar, Tabiamo, Diana Thater, and Leo Villareal, to name just a few. Looking to the future, worthy challenges will continue in efforts to augment a collection at the soul of a museum that strives to provide innovative perspectives on the wonderfully diverse world of contemporary art.

Peter Lipman
